The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Little Cryptogram, by J. Gilfin Pyle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Little Cryptogram
       A Literal Application to the Play of Hamlet of the Cipher
       System of Mr. Ignatius Donnelly.

Author: J. Gilfin Pyle

Release Date: August 1, 2014 [EBook #46464]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE CRYPTOGRAM ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Stephen Hutcheson, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                         The Little Cryptogram:


A Literal Application to the Play of Hamlet of the Cipher System of MR.
                           IGNATIUS DONNELLY.


  By J. GILPIN PYLE, Assistant Editor of The Saint Paul Pioneer Press.

    "As I do live by foode, I met a foole,
                              When I did heare
  The motley Foole, thus morall on the time,
  My Lungs began to crow like Chanticleere,
  That Fooles should be so deepe contemplative;
  And I did laugh, sans intermission,
  An houre by his diall.   Oh noble foole,
  A worthy foole:   Motley's the onely weare."
                                                 AS YOU LIKE IT: II., 7.


                              Saint Paul.
                         The Pioneer Press Co.
                                 1888.

                            Copyright, 1888.
                           BY J. GILPIN PYLE.
                          ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.




                             Author's Note.


_A considerable portion of the contents of these pages appeared first as
an editorial article in the Pioneer Press. By request of many friends,
this practical application of Mr. Donnelly's cipher system to six pages
of Hamlet is presented, revised and enlarged, to the general public._

                                                              _J. G. P._




                         The Little Cryptogram.


"The Great Cryptogram," the monumental work in which Mr. Ignatius
Donnelly essays to prove that the so-called Shakespeare plays contain a
cipher story, discoverable by a system which he has worked out with
infinite labor, is at last in the hands of an expectant public. No book
so thoroughly advertised has appeared for many a year. For months and
months the eye has been assailed by paragraphs and pages in the
literature of two worlds, contending for or against the existence in the
Shakespeare plays of a cipher that would assign the honor of their
authorship to Lord Bacon. It has been admitted on all sides, and
declared by Mr. Donnelly himself, that the appearance of this volume
would rid the world of a delusion forever, and stamp the successful
explorer of the mystery with undying fame, or write him down as the most
daring and stupendous literary fraud that all the ages have produced.
The author has challenged the test. It is his due that the results of
his labor should have a candid and impartial investigation.

Those who are interested in knowing whether "The Great Cryptogram" is a
record of discovery or a record of ingenious and plausible invention may
pass quickly over the first book of the volume, which deals with "The
Argument," because in this Mr. Donnelly does not lay claim to
originality. It is devoted to a careful and systematic marshaling of the
circumstantial evidence used in the past to prove that the historical
Shakespeare did not write the plays commonly ascribed to him. There is,
as every literary man knows, a great deal of evidence that will pass
muster under this head. There is an inconsistency between such fragments
of a life of Shakespeare as have come down to us, and the experiences
and the acquirements which we should declare indispensable to the
writing of that matchless drama. It is dwelt upon but lightly here; not
because any part of Mr. Donnelly's work should be slighted, but because
it is the cipher discovery by which he must stand or fall. For the same
reason it will be unnecessary to deal with the historical objections,
equally numerous and unanswerable, to the theory of Baconian authorship.
That Mr. Donnelly has made out a plausible and not unreasonable case, no
one will deny. As a collector and editor of the works of others; as a
curator of the museum in which patches and shreds of fact and theory,
gathered from diverse sources, are to be arranged and classified in
orderly succession, Mr. Donnelly is a master. His "Atlantis" and
"Ragnarok" gave proof of a marvelous memory and a rare ability to
dovetail disconnected and discordant facts into a homogeneous whole,
such as few can equal. Able to forget what does not accord with his
preconceived theory, blessed with a memory as serviceable in dismissing
as in retaining, and thoroughly possessed, for the time being, with a
conviction that he is pursuing truth, he is the most dexterous of
workmen. It is only natural, therefore, that his cumulative evidence
from history and fable and gossip should be well presented. He has
browsed in the pastures of Delia Bacon and Judge Holmes and Appleton
Morgan and Mrs. Potts. He has republished the best of their work,
joining the crevices skillfully, and the reader will find himself
entertained if not converted by this argument, which occupies more than
half of the bulky volume devoted to the cryptogram. This, however, is a
well-trodden field. These arguments are but a rehearsal of the clever
counsel's brief. Not to these, but to the Cesar of the cipher, has Mr.
Donnelly appealed for judgment. To the cipher and its mathematical
demonstrations he shall go.

Mr. Donnelly claims that there is concealed in the plays not only a
declaration that Bacon wrote them, but a detailed history of the times.
This is to be read by means of a word cipher, depending on a series of
fixed numbers. The root numbers which he gives as the starting point are
505, 506, 513, 516, 523. These numbers are combined, at pleasure, with a
vast number of "modifiers." The latter consist of the number of words in
a column, page or subdivision of the play selected; and of these numbers
plus or minus the hyphenated and bracketed words. By this method the
first two pages attacked yield him the following thirty-four "modifying"
numbers: 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 50, 51, 62, 63, 79, 80, 90, 91, 141,
142, 167, 168, 169, 189, 208, 209, 211, 212, 218, 219, 237, 240, 283,
284, 291, 294, 301, and 302. Counting forward or backward, at pleasure,
from the top or the bottom of each page, and from the beginning or the
end of each scene, he finds himself directed to the specific words that
tell the tale; each new count supplying a new "modifier." He does not
tell whence he derives his root numbers-and the world loses little by
that-because he is informed by his publishers that there is nothing in
our law of copyright to prevent some ingenious fellow, less
conscientious than himself, from studying out his whole system, applying
it to the rest of the plays, and bursting upon the world with the
remainder of the story, which Mr. Donnelly wants to reserve for a future
volume and future profits. How well grounded were his apprehensions the
appearance of this lesser cryptogram may serve to show. Therefore he
wraps himself in congenial mystery, and both his root numbers and his
modifiers must be taken on faith. It is hard for the average man, at
this point, to repress his scepticism, and to refuse straightforward
treatment to a man who advertises for two years a great discovery and
then reserves it for the future. There is a strong flavor of the Keeley
motor about the process. But not thus unjustly shall the public deal
with Minnesota's gifted son. We, the people, want to get at the bottom
of this cipher, and re-read our history of the Elizabethan era and its
literature.

The first step is to take an actual illustration of the cipher and Mr.
Donnelly's use of it, in order that the public may see just how the
thing works. The names "Shakespeare" and "Cecil" do not occur in the
plays. To obtain them, Mr. Donnelly's arithmetical process points him to
the words "shakes" and "peere," and to the other words "seas" and "ill;"
combining the former he gets Shakespeare, and the latter give him Cecil.
Now if the reader is the happy possessor of a copy of "The Great
Cryptogram," let him turn to page 718 as a base of operations. If his
library is not so enriched, what he finds here is ample for purposes of
illustration. This chapter deals with the revelations growing out of the
root number 516, judiciously modified. There are 167 words in the second
column of page 74 of King Henry IV, following the subdivision made by a
stage direction. There are 21 words in brackets, and one hyphenated
word, making 22 in all. Add 22 to 167, and you have 189. Subtract 189
from 516, and you have 327. This 327 is combined with other numbers,
derived from previous operations; the number of words on an antecedent
page or a former column, or some of the "modifiers" that wait modestly
till their assistance is needed. Out of these additions and
subtractions, perfectly arbitrary in their nature, comes finally a
number which directs the searcher to a word on page 76. How intricate
are these mathematical operations will be perceived only upon
examination. Therefore, the following, taken literally from pages 718,
719, is subjoined as fairly illustrative of the cipher gambols:

                                                     WORD    PAGE
                                                             AND
                                                            COLUMN
  516-167=349-22_b_ & _h_=327                         182   76:1   Seas}
      498-327=171+1=172+10_b_ & _h_=182
  516-167=349-22_b_ & _h_=327   447-327=120+1=        121   75:1   ill}
  516-167=349-22_b_ & _h_=327-30=297-50 (76:1)=       247   76:2   said
  516-167=349-22_b_ & _h_=327-284=43                  408   75:1   that
      447-43=404+1=405+3_b_=408
  516-167=349-22_b_ & _h_=327-254=73-15_b_ & _h_=58   391   76:1   More}
        448-58=390+1 = 391
  516-167=349-22_b_ & _h_=327-50=277-50               226   74:1   low}
      (74:2)=227-1_h_=226
  516-167=349-22_b_ & _h_=327-254=73-50               22    76:1   or
      (76:2)=23-1_h_=22
  516-167=349-22_b_ & _h_=327-30=297-254=43-15_b_ &   28    75:2   Shak'st}
      _h_=28
  516-167=349-22_b_ & _h_=327-248=79                 (121)  75:1   spar}
      193-79=114+1=115_b_ & _h_=(121)
  516-167=349-22_b_ & _h_=327-254=73-15_b_ & _h_=58   441   76:1   never
        498-58=440+1=441
  516-167=349-22_b_ & _h_=327-50=227-7_b_ & _h_=      220   76:2   writ
  516-167=349-22_b_ & _h_=327                         327   76:1   a
  516-167=349-22_b_ & _h_=327-145 (76:2)=182          317   76:1   word
      498-182=316+1=317
  516-167=349-22_b_ & _h_=327-193=134                 115   74:2   of
      248-134=114+1=115
  516-167=349-22_b_ & _h_=327-254=73-15_b_ &          53    74:1   them
      _h_=58-5_b_=53

Before I proceed to the obviously fair and conclusive test of applying
the same numbers and the same method elsewhere, there are some
reflections to be noted, which will occur spontaneously to almost every
reader. In the first place, the cipher seems, like the man who claimed
that he never borrowed the kettle, that he had returned it and that it
was cracked when he borrowed it, to prove too much. If it led directly
to important disclosures concerning the authorship of the plays or
historical events of the time when they were written, and to these
alone, it might lay claim to credibility. But this cipher, prepared by
Bacon to prevent Shakespeare from stealing his laurels, requires the
appropriation of page after page to describe minutely Shakespeare's
personal appearance. A glance at the sample printed will show how great
the labor required to encase such a story, by mathematical rule, in the
body of the plays. Yet this labor Bacon must have undergone, to tell the
coming ages that "He," Shakespeare, "is troubled with several dangerous
diseases; he is subject to the gout in his great toe; and I hear
moreover he hath fallen into a consumption." The spectacle of Bacon,
holding weary vigil to complete, at infinite labor, the cipher story,
and devoting hours to the construction of a play in which the movement
of the plot, the fate of the _personae and the majesty of the dialogue
should be unconsidered trifles, subordinated to the all-important
infolded chronicle of the fact that Shakespeare had the gout in his
great toe, is one for gods to weep at. Nor was this the limit of the
Baconian genius. Complicated as is the work of reading this involved
tale by the cipher's help, it bears no comparison to the work of
incorporating originally that story in the plays. To write the Donnelly
memoirs first, and then so to write the dramas that each word of the one
shall fit into its appropriate place in the other, by mathematical rule,
would fall little short of miracle. From Archimedes to Olney, there has
lived no man who would dare attempt this task. Admiration for Bacon the
dramatist, is swallowed up in reverence for Bacon the mathematician,
whose equal the world has never seen.

It was necessary, for the benefit of those untaught in the Eleusinian
mysteries wherein Mr. Donnelly revels, to make this exemplary statement
of his method. Now for the crucial test that shall establish its
genuineness. The author begs permission to announce that he has done
some cipher work on his own account, following closely Mr. Donnelly's
instructions; and that he has made a discovery scarcely less interesting
to a generation of scoffers than that of his illustrious teacher. Nay,
nothing but modesty forbids him to claim first prize; for this
application of the identical cipher is absolutely confirmatory of its
worth, and sheds new lustre on the names of both Donnelly and Bacon. In
studying the cryptogram, with the help of Mr. Donnelly's directions, the
thought suggested itself with overwhelming force, must there not be some
reference in the plays to the cipher mystery, and some prophecy of the
day when this riddle should be read? Fortunately, it happens that this
inquiry need not go unanswered. Not everyone has access to the great
Shakespeare folio, so called, in the library of Columbia College. But
Messrs. Funk & Wagnalls, New York, published last year a reduced
fac-simile of the famous first folio edition of 1623. In his
introduction to this volume, Mr. J. O. Halliwell-Phillips, the eminent
Shakespearian scholar and critic, says: "For all usual practical objects
of study, this cheap reproduction will place its owner on a level with
the envied possessors of the far-famed original." This fac-simile of the
1623 folio, to which alone the cipher applies, has been used in all the
researches stimulated by the great cipher discovery. Here was the key
and here the treasure house. Not with any desire to rob Mr. Donnelly of
future fame, but animated solely by the hope that his work could be
proved accurate to the doubter, did the present writer attempt the task
of unlocking the secret chamber of genius. It is with more than ordinary
pride that he announces a splendid and complete success, which silences
forever all cavil as to the cipher.

It was clear that Bacon, with his unparalleled keenness of intellect,
must foresee that Hamlet would be pronounced his greatest work. That
play would be most minutely scanned and critically studied. It was to
Hamlet, therefore, that the trembling neophyte turned as a promising
field for exploration. Now, following everywhere the Donnellian method,
at what part of Hamlet should a beginning be made? Clearly, one must
look for something disconnected from and out of harmony with the rest of
that magnificent drama; something obviously dragged in by the breeches
for a purpose. Glancing over this old folio, the first obvious
interpolation appeared to be the mad songs of Ophelia. Here is matter
senseless by itself. To introduce it, the writer was compelled to have
Ophelia go mad and talk nonsense. And those stanzas beginning, "Then up
he rose and donned his clothes," are not only foolish but indelicate.
Here was a suggestion. It warranted an experiment. It will be remembered
that one of Mr. Donnelly's root numbers is 523. This mad song occurs on
page 273 of the folio. Subtracting 273 from 523, we get 250. Count from
the top of the column on that page in which the song is found, and the
250th word is "donned," printed thus, "don'd." In enumerating, it is to
be observed that "its selfe" and "to morrow" make, properly speaking,
but one word each, and must be counted so. To point the student at once
to the key word, italicized and bracketed words are here included in the
count. Now the word "don," occurring in "Titus Andronicus," is printed
"d'on," to indicate its formation. Here the apostrophe is omitted, as if
to call attention to the combination of letters, "don." This is at least
suspicious.

Acting upon this clue, search is made for the next interpolation. It is
found but three pages further on, in the absurd grave-diggers' scene.
This is preceded by the direction, "Enter two clowns." Now clowns do not
dig graves, and grave-diggers are not generally clowns. It was clearly
the intention of the writer to call special attention to the following
lines. And the passage itself contains matter which is more ridiculous
than anything in Ophelia's crazy words: "If the man go to the water and
drown himself, it is will he nill he, he goes; mark you that; but if the
water come to him and drown him, he drowns not himself." What rot is
this which the great Bacon utters? There is a rat behind this arras. But
how to get at him! We turn for help to the cryptogram. We find, on page
555 of that volume, the account of Mr. Donnelly's first discovery. He
noted the word "Bacon," on page 53 of I "Henry IV." He counted the
number of italicized words in the first column of that page and found it
to be 7; multiplied that number by the page number, and found the
product 371; and, lo! the 371st word was "Bacon." We go back to the
grave-diggers. On the page where they are voicing idiocy, there are six
italicized words in the first column. The number of the page is 276.
Divide 276 by 6, and the quotient is 46. Count upward from the bottom of
the second column, and the 46th word is "nill he," so printed for
concealment. This phrase, "will he nill he," occurs nowhere else in the
plays. It is here for a purpose. The mad song gave "Don." The graveyard
scene gives, by Mr. Donnelly's process, closely followed, "nill he."
"Don nill he;" "Donnelly." Eureka! we are on the trail of the mystery,
and the cipher has been at work here. There must be more behind.

Now, lest anyone should entertain the injurious and erroneous suspicion
that this is mere burlesque let it be stated here that what has
preceded, and what follows is the result, in every instance, of accurate
mathematical work. A few of the Donnelly numbers, and the numbers of
pages and of words on a page were used, and no others. The cipher
employed is the Donnelly cipher. The words on every page, the italicized
words, the bracketed words and the hyphenated words were counted
separately and numbered. The edition used is the fac-simile reproduction
of the 1623 folio. Every computation has been carefully made. And if any
reader doubts, he is requested to procure a copy of the reprint, make
the count and verify the figures for himself, and prove to himself that
the cipher discovery which follows is as literally worked out, as
credible, as truly the work of Lord Bacon as anything to be found from
cover to cover of "The Great Cryptogram."

Turning again to Hamlet, there is circumstantial evidence sufficient to
show that the remarkable pointing to the word "Donnelly" could not be a
mere coincidence. For example, in the same column with "don," and but a
few lines further on, occurs the expression "most violent author." Is
this an accident? Again, the word "politician," according to the
lexicons, occurs not over half a dozen times in all the plays. It is
found twice in these six pages, in intimate connection with the word
"Donnelly;" once in the far-fetched expression "life-rendering
politician," which means nothing. Still again, popular nomenclature has
designated Mr. Donnelly as "The Sage of Nininger." By that title he is,
perhaps, better known throughout the Northwest than by his legal name.
Now the word "sage" is another used less than half a dozen times in all
the plays. It is found here; and found in the expression, "sage
requiem," which has so puzzled the commentators that "sage" is omitted
in many of the common editions. To put it here, where the cipher
required it, the writer of this play was compelled to make his
expression meaningless. It is simply impossible that this combination of
unusual words, "Donnelly," "politician," "author," "sage," all jostling
each other in passages introduced without relevance to the play, should
be an accident. It is deep design. Bacon, looking forward with more than
mortal prescience, saw the day when his deliverer would come. And in
anticipation of this event, he put into his greatest play, by means of
the cipher, the prophecy that is now fulfilled. By one act of
transcendent genius, he made it impossible for anyone to reject the
revelation which his interpreter should make in the fulness of time.

The cipher key furnished by Mr. Donnelly may now be applied to the last
pages of Act IV, and the first of Act V, Hamlet. No attempt will be made
to work out the whole story. That gladsome task belongs to Mr. Donnelly
himself. But enough may be read to show the wondrous ingenuity of Lord
Bacon, and to confirm in him the gift of prophecy. "The Great
Cryptogram" furnishes, as before stated, five root numbers; the Hamlet
cipher uses but two of these, 516 and 523. Pages 73 and 74 of King Henry
IV supplied thirty-four "modifiers;" the Hamlet cipher requires but
nine, all told. Three of these, 30, 50 and 198 (the last mentioned being
reserved for cases where the cipher-hunter falls into a hole and can not
get out without its help) are on Mr. Donnelly's list. Three more, 273,
274 and 276, are the numbers of the pages of Hamlet to which the cipher
is applied most liberally. The remaining three, 306, 397 and 423, are
the number of words on these three pages respectively; only those
printed in Roman characters and not included within brackets being
counted. In general, the system of counting adopted by Mr. Donnelly is
followed. But the Hamlet cipher usually regards such forms as "'twere"
and "there's" as two distinct words; while "her selfe" and "to morrow,"
as noted above, though printed without the hyphen, constitute but one
word each. Bracketed and italicized words are always to be omitted, in
the enumeration, except in case of the important initial word "Don," and
the word "out;" and inasmuch as these themselves are found in italics,
both bracketed and italicized words are included in computing their
numbers on the page.

These instructions as to the method of enumeration being premised,
particular attention is called to the extreme simplicity of the Hamlet
cipher as compared with the key to Henry IV; which is as profusely
numbered as the hairs of the righteous. This table shows at a glance, as
will be seen by comparison with the following cipher narrative, all the
numbers used in combination to produce the secret story which the author
has discovered.

  Of Donnelly's root numbers                                  516, 523
  Of Donnelly's modifiers                                  30, 50, 198
  Page numbers from Hamlet                               273, 274, 276
  Roman words, p. 273, col. 2                                      306
      "   "   "   274,   " 1                                       397
      "   "   "   276,   " 1                                       423

By combining these in different ways, adding or subtracting at pleasure
as Mr. Donnelly does, the number of italicized, bracketed and hyphenated
words separately, and reserving the right which he claims liberally to
increase or decrease the result by 1 arbitrarily, there is obtained in
every case the number indicating the given word on each page, reading
from top or bottom as the case may be, in its appropriate column. If
there is anything wrong with the result, the fault must lie with Lord
Bacon and the Great Cryptogram. Here is what the cipher, so amazingly
simple in its convolutions, cries out across the centuries since Bacon
died to the unbeliever of to-day:

                                              WORD   Page
                                                     and
                                                     Col.
  523-273=                                    250   273:2  Don}
  276/6=                                       46   276:2  nill he,}
                                                           Donnelly
  523-306=217   273-217=56+30=86-50=36-2_i_=   34   273:2  the
  523-273=250   516-250=266+2_i_=             268   273:2  author,
  523-306=217   274-217=57-2_h_=               55   274:2  politician
  523-50=473-273=                             200   273:2  and
  523-397=126+276=402-50=                     352   276:1  mountebanke,
  523-274=249+50=299-4_b_=295-2_b_=           293   274:1  will
  No. words _p._ 274, col. 1=                 395   275:2  worke
  516+50=566-273=293-30=                      263   273:2  out
  523+50=573-397=176-30=146-5_h_=             141   274:2  the
  516-306=210-198=12+10_i_=                    22   274:1  secret
  523-397=126-1=                              125   274:2  of
  523-274=249   306-249=57+11_i_+1=            69   274:1  this
  516-423=93+50=143-2_i_=141-1_h_=140-1=      139   276:1  play.
  523-274=249-30=219-2_h_-1=                  216   274:2  The
  523+30=553-423=                             130   278:2  Sage
  523-397=126+30=156-2_h_=                    154   274:2  is
  523-274=249+5_h_=254-1=                     253   274:2  a
  516-274=242+50=292+5_h_+1=                  298   274:2  daysie.

The nineteenth century world may well close its ears to tales of Cecil's
envy and Shakespeare's gout, and the wrath of the red-haired queen, to
listen to the voice of Bacon, saying "Donnelly, the author, politician
and mountebanke, will worke out the secret of this play. The Sage is a
daysie."

Columns might be filled in an attempt to notice all the ingenuities of
this work. For instance, the bringing in of Ophelia with her flowers,
her "rosemary" and "rue," and her "pansies for thoughts," solely to
introduce the quaint word "daysie;" in order that Lord Bacon might tell
his opinion of his great discoverer and defender, in language that would
fit the ears of this modern and slangy age. Nor is it possible to do
more than barely mention that there can be no difficulty in finding the
whole life history of Mr. Donnelly in "Hamlet" and other plays. No doubt
the cipher, applied more fully to the pages already considered, would
recount his diversions in Minnesota politics. And he is mentioned
elsewhere. In "Titus Andronicus," for example, we have "d'on," and
repeatedly afterward, "kneel." Still more marked is the reference in
Henry V. A French boy is lugged into that play for no purpose but to
jabber a language unfamiliar to and hated by an English audience of that
day. His "donne," "donner," "donnerai," are repeated, parrot-like, to
weariness, obviously to fix attention on that prominent syllable, "don."
And then, but a few pages away, we have, "He is married to Nell
Quickly;" "And shall my Nell keep lodgers?" This is no accident, for
accident is unknown to the so-called Shakespearian drama. "Don Nell,"
"Nell Quickly," over and over again, are very mileposts leading to the
name of Donnelly, and to a cipher story that will reveal to the curious
the inwardness of his career. It is no trifle to work out the cipher. To
unearth a sentence, especially if you are at all particular as to what
that sentence should say, requires hours of the hardest labor. But labor
most arduous will not be in vain if applied to this significant and
inviting portion of Henry V, by those who bestow on Mr. Donnelly the
same reverential admiration that he cherishes for Lord Bacon.

There is, then, a cipher. And this is the recipe. So extraordinary was
the command of language on the part of the writer of these plays, that a
few pages of any one of them, if separated into single words, will give
a vocabulary out of which any given story can be pieced. Pick out the
words you need to say what you desire. Count the number of each word
from the top or from the bottom of its column. Then, having five root
numbers, ten or a dozen modifiers, the number of the page and the number
of words on it, also the number of words in italics or connected by
hyphens, you have studied addition and subtraction to little purpose if
you can not so combine these various numbers that they shall furnish
you, at last, with the number that you need to identify the particular
word you have chosen. It is hard work. No wonder Mr. Donnelly covered,
with figuring, a bundle of paper that a man can scarcely lift. The
present writer consumed quires in a simple application of the cipher key
to Hamlet. But it pays; whether you want to make money out of a gullible
public, or to expose an ambitious fraud. Mr. Donnelly will gather a
fortune from his audacious and singularly successful advertisement; and
neither friend nor generous enemy will grudge him that. But, out of his
profits, he should erect upon the banks of the Mississippi, near his
Nininger home, a statue of himself; a noble statue, with the other
features in scholarly repose, while the mouth stretches into a capacious
grin, and the eyes are fixed upon a volume in the right hand; not a copy
of the "Great Cryptogram," but an edition of the "Shakespeare" plays,
opened at that famous passage in the "Midsummer Night's Dream," which
has been to him a steadfast rule in all his dealings with the world:
"What fools these mortals be."




                          Transcriber's Notes


--Copyright notice provided as in the original-this e-text is public
  domain in the country of publication.

--Silently corrected obvious errors; non-standard spelling and
  dialect was left unchanged.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Little Cryptogram, by J. Gilfin Pyle

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE CRYPTOGRAM ***

***** This file should be named   46464.txt or   46464.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/4/6/46464/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Stephen Hutcheson, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
